# Buddhism A Very Short Introduction
- (Added on l martes, 24 de marzo de 2020 15:43:03) of religion, then Buddhism cannot be a religion. Buddhism holds no such belief and, on the contrary, denies the existence of a creator god.
- (Added on l martes, 24 de marzo de 2020 15:43:07) Buddhism holds no such belief and, on the contrary, denies the existence of a creator god.
- (Added on l martes, 24 de marzo de 2020 15:44:37) religions may be said to have a practical and ritual dimension; an experiential and emotional dimension; a narrative or mythic dimension; a doctrinal and philosophical dimension; an ethical and legal dimension; a social and institutional dimension; and a material dimension.
- (Added on l martes, 24 de marzo de 2020 15:48:12) suggested that teachings not validated by personal experience were of little value.
- (Added on l martes, 24 de marzo de 2020 15:49:32) when Buddhists meditate, for example, they are not asking God to grant their wishes but endeavouring to cultivate wisdom and compassion.
- (Added on l martes, 24 de marzo de 2020 15:50:17) This emphasis on the interior experiential dimension of religious practice links Buddhism with the mystical traditions of ancient India, such as yoga. In yoga, various exercises – such as control of the posture and breath – are used to gain control over body and mind and harness their latent powers.
- (Added on l martes, 24 de marzo de 2020 15:51:33) Sometimes it is difficult to know whether the content of a myth is to be taken at face value or not. Those who believe in the literal truth of the Bible will tend to read the story of creation in Genesis as a factual account of how the world began. Others may prefer the scientific version of events while accepting that the Genesis account reveals a profound truth about the relationship between God and the universe.
- (Added on l martes, 24 de marzo de 2020 15:54:05) Buddhists in Asia do not use the term ‘Buddhism’ to describe their religion and refer to it as either the Dharma (‘Law’) or the Buddha-sāsana (‘teachings of the Buddha’).
- (Added on l martes, 24 de marzo de 2020 16:15:29) ‘Buddha’ is a not a personal name but an honorific title which means ‘awakened one’.
- (Added on l miércoles, 25 de marzo de 2020 0:54:36) According to Buddhism, human beings have free will, and in the exercise of free will they engage in self-determination. In a very real sense individuals create themselves through their moral choices. By freely and repeatedly choosing certain sorts of things, an individual shapes his character, and through his character his future. As the proverb has it: ‘Sow an act, reap a habit; sow a habit, reap a character; sow a character, reap a destiny.’
- (Added on l miércoles, 25 de marzo de 2020 1:11:49) Four Noble Truths. These assert that (1) life is suffering, (2) suffering is caused by craving, (3) suffering can have an end, and (4) there is a path which leads to the end of suffering.
- (Added on l miércoles, 25 de marzo de 2020 15:10:48) The Eightfold Path is known as the ‘middle way’ because it steers a course between a life of indulgence and one of harsh austerity. It consists of eight factors divided into the three categories of Morality, Meditation, and Wisdom.
- (Added on l jueves, 26 de marzo de 2020 0:15:14) century. The form of Buddhism which flourished there is
- (Added on l viernes, 27 de marzo de 2020 0:48:00) The Buddha's reason for leaving was that he came to see that entering into a state of trance, however blissful and serene, was only a temporary diversion and not a permanent solution to suffering
- (Added on l domingo, 29 de marzo de 2020 0:23:18) One of the most popular Western interpretations of Buddhism is as a rational philosophy, and developments in the West have created a climate which is favourable to Buddhism when seen in this light. The dominant cultural influences in the West since the Enlightenment in the eighteenth century have been science and secular liberalism.
