# Livewired
- The brain is a dynamic system, constantly altering its own circuitry to match the demands of the environment and the capabilities of the body.
- The elaborate pattern of connections in the brain—the circuitry—is full of life: connections between neurons ceaselessly blossom, die, and reconfigure. You are a different person than you were at this time last year, because the gargantuan tapestry of your brain has woven itself into something new.
- This caveman with identical DNA might look a bit like you, as a result of having the same genomic recipe book. But the caveman wouldn’t think like you. Nor would the caveman strategize, imagine, love, or simulate the past and future quite as you do. Why? Because the caveman’s experiences are different from yours. Although DNA is a part of the story of your life, it is only a small part. The rest of the story involves the rich details of your experiences and your environment,
- Dropping into the world with a half-baked brain has proven a winning strategy for humans. We have outcompeted every species on the planet:
- The brain distributes its resources according to what’s important, and it does so by implementing do-or-die competition among all the parts that make it up.
- the remainder of Matthew’s brain dynamically rewired to take over the missing functions. The blueprints of his nervous system adjusted themselves to occupy a smaller piece of real estate—encompassing the fullness of life with half the machinery.
- there is no overarching framework that tells us why and how the brain does what it does.
- The thrill of life is not about who we are but about who we are in the process of becoming.
- if you descend into a cave for several days—where there are no clues to the light and dark cycles of the surface—your circadian rhythm would drift in a range between twenty-one and twenty-seven hours. This exposes the brain’s simple solution: build a non-exact clock and then calibrate it to the sun’s cycle. With this elegant trick, there is no need to genetically code a perfectly wound clock. The world does the winding.
- Mother Nature’s strategy of unpacking a brain relies on proper world experience. Without it, the brain becomes malformed and pathological.
- Mother Nature’s strategy of unpacking a brain relies on proper world experience. Without it, the brain becomes malformed and pathological. Like a tree that needs nutrient-rich soil to arborize, a brain requires the rich soil of social and sensory interaction.
- neighboring parts of the body were represented by neighboring spots on the brain.
- Unsurprisingly, a gentle touch on the monkey’s nerve-severed hand no longer activated any response in the cortex. But the surprise was that the little bit of cortex that used to represent the hand was now excited by a touch to the face.4 The map of the body had reorganized.
- The brain’s map was flexibly defined by active inputs from the body.
- the areas once representing the nerve-severed limbs had been taken over by neighboring areas in the cortex. The homunculi had transformed to match the monkeys’ new body plans.
- With modern imaging techniques, we can see that when an arm is amputated, its representation in the cortex is encroached upon by neighboring areas.
- why, if you were to touch Nelson on his face, would he say that his phantom hand was being touched? Didn’t the neighboring areas take over the hand representation? The answer is that touch to the hand is represented not only by cells in the somatosensory cortex but also by the cells they talk to downstream, and the cells they talk to. So although the map modified itself rapidly in the primary somatosensory cortex, it shifted less and less in downstream areas.
- if you merely tie two fingers of your hand together—so they no longer operate independently, but instead as a unit—their cortical representation will eventually merge from two distinct regions into a single area.12
- neurons that fire together, wire together.
- a typical neuron. It reaches out to touch ten thousand neighbors. But it doesn’t form equally strong relationships with all ten thousand. Instead, the strengths are based on timing. If our neuron spikes, and then a connected neuron spikes just after that, the bond between them is strengthened. This rule can be summarized as neurons that fire together, wire together.13
- The same is true all over your body: patches that are neighboring will tend to be co-active more than patches that are not neighboring. After interacting with the world for a while, areas of skin that happen to be co-active often will wire up next to one another, and those that are not correlated will tend to be far apart.
- In other words, the brain contains a map of the body because of a simple rule that governs how individual brain cells make connections with one another: neurons that are active close in time to one another tend to make and maintain connections between themselves. That’s how a map of the body emerges in the darkness.14
- When a person’s eyes are damaged, signals no longer flood in along the pathways to the occipital cortex
- When a person’s eyes are damaged, signals no longer flood in along the pathways to the occipital cortex (the portion at the back of the brain, often thought of as “visual” cortex). And so that part of the cortex becomes no longer visual. The ships carrying visual data have stopped arriving, so the coveted territory is taken over by the competing kingdoms of sensory information.
- The story has grown even more interesting in recent years: when new occupants move into the visual cortex, they retain some of the former architecture—like the mosques in Turkey that used to be Roman cathedrals. As an example, the area that processes visual written language in the sighted is the same area that becomes active when the blind read Braille.
- Such observations have led to the hypothesis that the brain is a “task machine”—doing jobs like detecting motion or objects in the world—rather than a system organized by particular senses.24 In other words, brain regions care about solving certain types of tasks, irrespective of the sensory channel by which information arrives.
- As a result, perfect musical pitch is overrepresented in the blind, and blind people are up to ten times better at determining whether a musical pitch subtly wobbles up or down.
- The author wrote, “Many blind persons develop in the course of time a considerable ability to avoid obstacles by means of auditory cues received from sounds of their own making.”
- the occipital lobe can be taken over by many tasks, not just those of hearing. Memorization, for example, can benefit from the extra cortical real estate. In one study, blind people were tested to see how well they could remember lists of words. Those with more of their occipital cortex taken over could score higher: they had more territory to devote to the memory task.
- The general story is straightforward: the more real estate, the better.
- Neural redeployment replaces the old paradigm of predetermined brain areas with something more flexible. Territory can be reassigned to different tasks. There is nothing special about visual cortex neurons, for example. They are simply neurons that happen to be involved in processing edges or colors in people who have functioning eyes. These exact same neurons can process other types of information in the sightless.
- In one of their studies, sighted participants were blindfolded for five days, during which time they were put through an intensive Braille-training paradigm.39 At the end of five days, the subjects had become quite good at detecting subtle differences between Braille characters—much better than a control group of sighted participants who underwent the same training without a blindfold. But especially striking was what happened to their brains, as measured in the scanner. Within five days, the blindfolded participants had recruited their occipital cortex when they were touching objects. Control subjects, not surprisingly, used only their somatosensory cortex.
- We suggest that dreaming exists to keep the visual cortex from being taken over by neighboring areas. After all, the rotation of the planet does not affect anything about your ability to touch, hear, taste, or smell; only vision suffers in the dark.
- REM sleep is triggered by a particular set of neurons in a brainstem structure called the pons. The increased activity in these neurons has two consequences. The first is that the major muscle groups become paralyzed. Elaborate neural circuitry keeps the body frozen during dreaming, and its elaborateness supports the biological importance of dream sleep; presumably, this circuitry would be unlikely to evolve without an important function behind it. The muscular shutdown allows the brain to simulate world experience without actually moving the body around. The second consequence is the really important one: waves of spikes travel from the brainstem to the occipital cortex.42 When the spikes arrive there, the activity is experienced as visual. We see. This activity is why dreams are pictorial and filmic, instead of conceptual or abstract.
- This combination crafts the experience of dreaming: the invasion of the electrical waves into the occipital cortex makes the visual system active, while the muscular paralysis keeps the dreamer from acting on the experiences.
- Because neurons that fire together wire together, co-activation establishes neighboring representations in the brain. No matter
- Because neurons that fire together wire together, co-activation establishes neighboring representations in the brain.
- Because neurons that fire together wire together, co-activation establishes neighboring representations in the brain. No matter the shape of your body, it will naturally end up mapped on the brain’s surface.
- your brain is locked in a crypt of silence and darkness inside your skull. All it ever sees are electrochemical signals that stream in along different data cables. That’s all it has to work with. In ways we are still working to understand, the brain is stunningly gifted at taking in these signals and extracting patterns. To those patterns it assigns meaning. With the meaning you have subjective experience. The brain is an organ that converts sparks in the dark into the euphonious picture show of your world.
- There’s an interesting consequence to this: your brain doesn’t know, and it doesn’t care, where the data come from. Whatever information comes in, it just works out how to leverage it. This makes the brain a very efficient kind of machine. It is a general-purpose computing device. It just sucks up the available signals and determines—nearly optimally—what it can do with them.
- The all-purpose cortex idea suggests how new sensory skills can be added during evolution: with a mutated peripheral device, a new data stream makes its way into some swath of the brain, and the neural processing machinery gets to work. Thus, new skills require only the development of new sensory devices.
- To accommodate such varied peripherals, does the brain have to be redesigned each time? I suggest not. In evolutionary time, random mutations introduce strange new sensors, and the recipient brains simply figure out how to exploit them. Once the principles of brain operation have been established, nature can simply worry about designing new sensors.
- sensory input is best learned when one can interact with the world. Letting users control the camera closed the loop between muscle output and sensory input.13 Perception can be understood not as passive but instead as a way to actively explore the environment, matching a particular action to a specific change in what returns to the brain. It doesn’t matter to the brain how that loop gets established—whether by moving the extraocular muscles that move the eye or using arm muscles to tilt a camera. However it happens, the brain works to figure out how the output maps to the input.
- if there’s an area of the brain devoted to hearing, it’s only because peripheral devices (in this case, the ears) send information along cables that plug into the cortex at that spot. It’s not the auditory cortex by necessity; it’s the auditory cortex only because signals passed along by the ears have shaped its destiny.
- people who use the BrainPort begin to feel that scenes have “openness” and “depth” and that objects are out there. In other words, it’s more than a cognitive translation of what’s happening on the tongue: it grows into a direct perceptual experience. Their experience is not “I feel a pattern on my tongue that codes for my spouse passing by,” but instead a direct sense that their spouse is moving across the living room.
- The algorithm manipulates sound along three dimensions: the height of an object is represented by the frequency of the sound, the horizontal position is represented by time via a panning of the stereo input (imagine sound moving in the ears from left to right, the way you scan a scene with your eyes), and the brightness of an object is represented by volume. Visual information could be captured for a grayscale image of about sixty by sixty pixels.33 Try to imagine the experience of using these glasses. At first, everything sounds like a cacophony. As one moves around the environment, pitches are buzzing and whining in an alien and useless manner. After a while, one gets a sense of how to use the sounds to navigate around. At this stage it is a cognitive exercise: one is laboriously translating the pitches into something that can be acted upon.
- After some weeks or months, blind users begin performing well.34 But not just because they have memorized the translation. Instead, they are, in some sense, seeing. In a strange, low-resolution way, they are experiencing vision.
- the brain figures out how to extract shape information from incoming signals, regardless of the path by which those signals get into the inner sanctum of the skull—whether by sight, touch, or sound. The details of the detectors don’t matter. All that matters is the information they carry.
- If it seems surprising that a blind person can come to “see” with her tongue or through cell phone earbuds, just remember how the blind come to read Braille. At first the experience involves mysterious bumps on the fingertips. But soon it becomes more than that: the brain moves beyond the details of the medium (the bumps) for a direct experience of the meaning. The Braille reader’s experience parallels yours as your eyes flow over this text: although these letters are arbitrary shapes, you surpass the details of the medium (the letters) for a direct experience of the meaning.
- We had Jonathan train with the Neo-sensory Vest for four days, two hours a day, learning from a set of thirty words. On the fifth day, Scott shielded his mouth (so his lips couldn't be read) and said the word “touch.” Jonathan felt the complicated pattern of vibrations on his torso. And then he wrote the word “touch” on the dry-erase board. Scott now said a different word (“where”), and Jonathan wrote it on the board. Jonathan was able to translate the complicated pattern of vibrations into an understanding of the word that was spoken. He was not doing the decoding consciously, because the patterns were too complicated; instead, his brain was unlocking the patterns. When we switched to a new set of words, his performance stayed high, indicating that he was not simply memorizing but learning how to hear. In other words, if you have normal hearing, I can say a new word to you (“schmegegge”) and you hear it perfectly well—not because you’ve memorized it, but because you’ve learned how to listen.
- That’s why it’s interesting to rethink a state-of-the-art cockpit: instead of a pilot trying to read the whole thing visually, she feels it. A high-dimensional stream of data into the body tells the pilot what the plane is up to, all at once. Why does this have a good chance of working? Because the brain has great talent at reading high-dimensional data from the body. This is why, for example, you can balance on one foot: different muscle groups from your legs, torso, and arms are all streaming their data, and the brain summarizes the situation and rapidly sends out corrections.
- we become aware of our senses only when our expectations are violated. Consider the feeling of your shoe on your right foot. You can attend to it and feel its presence. But normally, the data coming in from the skin of your foot live below your awareness. Only when you get a pebble in your shoe do you attend to the stream of information.
- As a result of feeling the high-dimensional data, the stock trader might be able to perceive the big picture (oil is about to crash) long before she can pick out the individual variables (Apple is going up, Exxon is sinking, and Walmart is holding steady). How would this be possible? Think about the visual signals you get when you look at your dog in the yard. You don’t say, “Well, I noticed there’s a photon here, and a slightly dimmer one here, and a line of bright ones here.” Instead, you perceive the big picture.
- The brain takes quadrillions of spikes coming through the eyes and eventually learns to extract patterns, and patterns on top of those patterns, and patterns on top of those . . . and eventually the summary of all those patterns is what we call the experience of vision. The brain needs to learn how to see, just as it needs to learn how to control its arms and legs. Babies don’t pop out knowing how to swing dance, nor do they have the subjective quality of vision. We had to learn our current sensory organs.
- The fact that you can’t imagine a new color is extraordinarily revealing. It illustrates for us the fence line of our qualia, beyond which we simply cannot walk. So if the ability to create new senses proves possible, a striking consequence is that we won’t be able to explain the new sense to another person. For example, you have to experience purple to know what purple
- The fact that you can’t imagine a new color is extraordinarily revealing. It illustrates for us the fence line of our qualia, beyond which we simply cannot walk. So if the ability to create new senses proves possible, a striking consequence is that we won’t be able to explain the new sense to another person. For example, you have to experience purple to know what purple is.
- attempt to explain vision to a friend born blind: you can try all you’d like, and your blind friend might even pretend to understand what you’re talking about. But in the end it’s a fruitless attempt. To understand vision requires experiencing vision.
- we like the lemon-pie smell because the molecules predict the presence of a rich energy source. We have a bad emotion with the diarrhea because it is full of pathogens, and evolution doesn’t want you, under any circumstances, to stick it in your mouth.
- The emotions simply reflect the meaning of the data to you, in the context of your goals and evolutionary pressures.
- Mother Nature has the freedom to experiment with outlandish plug-and-play motor devices. Whether fingers, flappers, or fins; whether two legs, four legs, or eight; whether hands or talons or wings—the fundamental principles of brain operation don’t need to be redesigned each time. The motor system simply figures out how to drive the available machinery.
- Just observe that same baby in her crib. She bites her toes, slaps her forehead, tugs on her hair, bends her fingers, and so on, learning how her motor output corresponds to the sensory feedback she receives. In this way, she learns to understand the language of her body: how her outputs map onto the next inputs. By this technique, we eventually learn to walk,
- we use the same learning method to attach extensions to our bodies. Think about riding a bicycle, a machine that our genome presumably didn’t see coming.
- By babbling with their bodies, they try out various moves, postures, positions, and balances, and they assess the results.
- The feedback allows the motor system to fine-tune millions of parameters and perform better the next time around. In this way, the organism builds a model of its body’s interaction with the world. It comes to grasp its capacities and the consequences of its movements. It comes to know what the environment allows.
- The brain learns to drive its body best when there’s a closed loop of feedback: not just output, but input as well that verifies the interaction with the world. For example, when the baby bangs her arm against the bars of the crib, she feels it, sees it, and hears it.
- while making a good robotic arm is a challenge for researchers, much of the operational work falls on the brain of the user. Because we didn’t grow up with metal limbs, the movements of the souped-up tin can aren’t intuitive. Our brains have to learn how to control the limb, just as Jan does. Half the work is on the side of the engineers, and the other half transpires in the neural forests of the user’s brain.
- The developing field of avatar robotics allows a user to control a robot at a distance, seeing what it sees and feeling what it feels.
- who we are depends on how the whole brain is wired. Tweak the body and you may tweak the person.
- As a real-life example, consider the metal smelter Nigel Ackland, who lost his forearm in an industrial accident. He was a physical and emotional wreck, but then he got a beautiful bionic arm installed.30 His brain sends commands to his remaining nerves and muscles, and those signals get interpreted to move the hand smoothly in more than a dozen different motions. But here’s the kicker: ask Nigel to turn his wrist. He’ll hold up his arm and rotate his hand . . . and it keeps rotating, around and around on its axis. It continues to turn like a slowly spinning top as long as he wants it to. Nigel has a better body than you do, and by that I mean one with fewer constraints. When the bio-engineers made this hand, they realized there’s no particular benefit to sticking with the restricting ligaments and tendons that limit our movements. Presumably, Nigel can think thoughts we cannot. Like “keep my hand rotating.” Or “install a lightbulb in one motion.”
- what you do over and over becomes reflected in the structure of the brain. And these changes involve much more than the motor cortex. For example, if you spend months learning to read Braille, the bit of your cortex that represents touch from the index finger will grow.6 If you take up juggling as an adult, visual areas of your brain increase.7 Brains reflect not simply the outside world but more specifically your outside world.
- auditory system begins universally and then wires itself to maximize the distinctions unique to your language, depending where on the planet you happen to stick your head out of the womb.
- In the absence of finding an answer to her challenge, she would have starved and died. Her drive for survival allowed the flexible circuitry in her brain to try out many hypotheses and solve the problem, getting her to sustenance and shelter and the care of loved ones.
- A brain’s goals play a critical role in how and when it changes.
- Imagine an experiment in which someone taps out Morse code on your foot, while someone else, totally separately, plays a sequence of sounds. If you can win cash for decoding the messages on your foot, brain regions involved in touch to that part of your body (in the somatosensory cortex) will develop higher resolution. However, the regions involved in your hearing (the auditory cortex) will not change, even though that brain area is also receiving stimulation
- Imagine an experiment in which someone taps out Morse code on your foot, while someone else, totally separately, plays a sequence of sounds. If you can win cash for decoding the messages on your foot, brain regions involved in touch to that part of your body (in the somatosensory cortex) will develop higher resolution. However, the regions involved in your hearing (the auditory cortex) will not change, even though that brain area is also receiving stimulation. Now imagine the reverse task: answering questions about subtle differences between the sounds earns the cash, while attending to the taps yields nothing. Now your auditory cortex will modify, but your somatosensory system won’t.14 The inputs from the world are exactly the same in both cases, but what changes depends on what is rewarded.
- The lessons of livewiring offer a counterintuitive solution known as constraint therapy: strap down her good arm so that it cannot be used. This forces her to employ the weak arm. This simple method retrains the damaged cortex by forcing use of the bad arm—and by cleverly taking advantage of the neural mechanisms underlying desire and reward.
- change is tied to anything that is relevant to your goals.
- When a task is roughly aligned with our larger goals, our brain circuitry comes to reflect
- Neurons that release acetylcholine are driven by both reward and punishment. They’re active when an animal is learning a task and needs to make changes, but not once the task is well established.20
- The presence of acetylcholine at a particular brain area tells it to change, but it doesn’t tell it how to change. In other words, when the cholinergic neurons (those that spit out acetylcholine) are active, they simply increase plasticity in the target areas. When they’re inactive, there’s little or no plasticity.
- So the basis of behavioral improvement is not simply the repeated performance of a task; it also requires neuromodulatory systems to encode relevance. Without acetylcholine, the ten thousand hours is wasted time.
- While acetylcholine turns on plasticity, other neurotransmitters (such as dopamine) are involved in the direction of change, encoding whether something was punishing or rewarding.
- The traditional classroom consists of a teacher droning on, possibly reading from bulleted slides. This is suboptimal for brain changes, because the students are not engaged, and without engagement there is little to no plasticity. The information doesn’t stick.
- when the learner can actively direct her own learning (by asking the wise person precisely the question she wants to answer), the molecules of relevance and reward are present. They allow the brain to reconfigure. Tossing facts at an unengaged student is like throwing pebbles to dent a stone wall.
- Your brain adjusts itself according to what you spend your time on, as long as those tasks have alignment with rewards or goals.
- The illusion comes about not because of passive fatigue but instead because of an active recalibration. Your system is exposed to continuous downward motion and, after a while, comes to assume this is the new normal. At first, the downward motion is dramatic information to the brain. After a while of staring, you receive no new information there. As far as your brain is concerned, this is the new reality: a world that flows more down than up.
- The system always wants to set up a ground truth so that it can be better at detecting change. In this case, when your visual field is filled with the sight of the waterfall, your brain strives to subtract off the downward motion. All the descending flow is no longer informative, and so the circuitry adjusts itself to be maximally sensitive to new information.
- This active recalibration of the world is why, in the 1980s, many people began to see text in books appearing to have a red tint. At that time, the population began to use computer monitors to do word processing. Unlike modern monitors, these early devices were able to display only one color, and so the text appeared as lines of green on a black background. People would stare at the horizontal green rows for hours at a time, and thus, when they picked up a book, the lines of text were shaded with the complementary color:
- This active recalibration of the world is why, in the 1980s, many people began to see text in books appearing to have a red tint. At that time, the population began to use computer monitors to do word processing. Unlike modern monitors, these early devices were able to display only one color, and so the text appeared as lines of green on a black background. People would stare at the horizontal green rows for hours at a time, and thus, when they picked up a book, the lines of text were shaded with the complementary color: red.
- MAKING INVISIBLE THE EXPECTED If
- Try it: take a yellow Ping-Pong ball and cut it exactly in half. Lay one hemisphere over each eye, and you’ll see the whole world as an even blanket of yellow. But within a few moments there is no color at all. It is as though you are blind. Your visual system assumes the world has become yellower, and it adapts so that you’ll be sensitive to other changes.
- Known as the Troxler effect, the illusion demonstrates that an unchanging stimulus in your peripheral vision will soon evaporate. Why does it happen? Because your visual system is always seeking motion and change. Something fixed quickly becomes invisible. Good information is expected to update; things that do not change are ignored by the system.
- The retina is blanketed by a meshwork of blood vessels. Because these sit between the world and our photoreceptors, we should see them superimposed on the visual scene. But the vessels’ pattern is stable, and hence carries no new information—and so our visual systems learn to ignore them completely.
- an energy-conscious brain wants to predict away everything possible so that it can save its energy for just representing the unexpected. Silence is golden.
- the violation of your expectation causes cascades of changes to deal with this new turn of events.
- when you first look at the Troxler picture, you notice the blobs, and when you first put in the contact lens, you detect the drawn-on shape. But after a short time your brain adjusts itself. It is no longer surprised.
- When people first experience the Neosensory wristband (which converts sound to patterns of vibration on the skin), they typically say with surprise, “Whoa, it’s picking up on my own voice!” They are always startled by that: it seems they shouldn’t be registering their own speech. But of course your ears pick up on your voice all the time. It’s typically the loudest voice in your conversations, because your own mouth is the closest one to your ears. However, because you can perfectly predict your own vocalizations, you hardly “hear” your own voice.
- This becomes obvious when wearing the wristband: you can’t believe how loud these events are, because your brain has not yet learned to predict the signals coming up your arm.
- Your brain actively recalibrates, because that allows it to burn less energy. But there is an even deeper principle at work here. In the darkness of the skull, your brain is striving to build an internal model of the outside world.
- You pay attention to the unexpected bang, the unforeseen brush on your skin, the surprising movement in your periphery. Attending allows you to put your high-resolution sensors on the problem and figure out how to incorporate it into your model.
- In contrast, you pay no attention to the feeling of the shoe on your left foot, because you already have an internal model of it, and that model is consistently predicting what you’re receiving.
- The difference between predictions and outcomes is the key to understanding a strange property of learning: if you’re predicting perfectly, your brain doesn’t need to change further.
- Fundamentally, the brain is a prediction machine, and that is the driving engine behind its constant self-reconfiguration. By modeling the state of the world, the brain reshapes itself to have good expectations, and therefore to be maximally sensitive to the unexpected.
- For both Alice and Matthew, the cerebral maps rewired themselves onto half the previous real estate while retaining their relationships, tasks, and functions.
- as a result of disinhibition, the widespread and previously silent projections become functionally operative. Unmasking these connections is possible only because the brain is highly cross wired with redundant connectivity.
- The brain starts off heavily interconnected and prunes the overlap with time.
- The brain starts off heavily interconnected and prunes the overlap with time. However, that early cross wiring does not go away completely. Even in the adult brain, primary auditory fibers reach directly into primary visual cortex, and vice versa.
- The brain starts off heavily interconnected and prunes the overlap with time. However, that early cross wiring does not go away completely. Even in the adult brain, primary auditory fibers reach directly into primary visual cortex, and vice versa.19 And this cross-stitching is what can allow rapid redeployment when necessary.
- This was made possible by competition at the level of the synapses and neurons, which allowed the rapid
- They both had rewired brains, such that both visual fields carried information to a single remaining hemisphere. This was made possible by competition at the level of the synapses and neurons, which allowed the rapid unmasking of existing connections as well as, with time, the growth of new axons and sprouting of new synapses. Throughout, Alice’s and Matthew’s desire to walk, to play tag, and to ride a bicycle provided the signals of relevance that allowed their brains to reorganize.
- quotations from the philosopher Martin Heidegger: “Every man is born as many men and dies as a single one.”
- Through decades of experience, the brain comes to physically represent the environment, and your decisions follow the remaining, hard-paved paths.
- Beyond the diminishing optionality in the pathways, there is a second reason that older brains are less flexible: when they change, they do so only in small spots. In contrast, baby brains modify across vast territories.
- When you’re an alert traveler in a new land, you drink in the sights of the foreign country, experiencing more novelty, more learning, and more distributed attention. After all, at home you pay attention to very little; it is all so predictable. When you are the traveler, you overflow with consciousness. In this view, when we are highly engaged and paying attention, we are like babies again.
- Sensitive periods are different for different tasks of the brain. Not all brain regions are equally plastic in terms of how flexibly they begin and how long they retain their adaptability.
- there’s a good deal of flexibility in the somatosensory and motor areas of adults, allowing you to learn how to hang glide or snowboard even in your later years.15
- how could the brain know in advance the order in which to solidify things? Is it genetically encoded? Possibly some aspects are, but I suggest a new hypothesis: the degree of plasticity in a brain region reflects how much its data change (or are likely to change) in the outside world.
- how could the brain know in advance the order in which to solidify things? Is it genetically encoded? Possibly some aspects are, but I suggest a new hypothesis: the degree of plasticity in a brain region reflects how much its data change (or are likely to change) in the outside world. If the incoming data are unwavering, the system hardens around them. If the data are constantly changing, the system remains flexible. As a result, stable data solidify first.
- there’s no single answer to whether the brain is plastic as we get older. It depends on what brain area we’re talking about. Plasticity declines with age, but across the brain it declines differently, steeply or shallowly, depending on its function.
- A stunning example emerged recently from the Nun Study, a multi-decade investigation of hundreds of Catholic nuns living in convents.18 All the sisters agreed to regularly test their cognitive function, share their medical records, and donate their brains after death. Amazingly, some of the nuns never displayed any cognitive decline—they were sharp as a whip—and yet their brains at autopsy were riddled with the ravages of Alzheimer’s disease. In other words, their neural networks were physically degenerating, but their performance was not. What could explain this? The key is that the nuns in their convents had to consistently use their wits until their final days. They had responsibilities, chores, social lives, arguments, game nights, group discussions, and so on. Unlike typical octogenarians, they didn’t have a retirement that plopped them onto a couch in front of a television set. Because of their active mental lives, their brains were forced to constantly build new bridges, even as some of their neural roadways were physically falling apart. In fact, a stunning one-third of the nuns seem to have had the molecular pathology of Alzheimer’s without the expected cognitive symptoms. An active mental life, even in the very elderly, fosters new connections.
- brain changes are driven by the difference between the internal model and what happens in the world. Thus, brains shift only when something is unpredicted.
- brains shift only when something is unpredicted. As you age and figure out the rules of the world—from the expectations of your home life to behavior in your social circles to the foods you prefer—your brain becomes less challenged with novel stimulation, and therefore more settled into place.
- Skill replaces flexibility.
- the brain’s solidification reflects its success in understanding the world. Neural networks lock themselves more deeply into place not because of fading function, but instead because they have had success in figuring things out.
- If plasticity didn’t decline, you would not lock down the conventions of the world. You’d never get good pattern recognition or the capacity to navigate a social
- If plasticity didn’t decline, you would not lock down the conventions of the world. You’d never get good pattern recognition or the capacity to navigate a social
- If plasticity didn’t decline, you would not lock down the conventions of the world. You’d never get good pattern recognition or the capacity to navigate a social life.
- fire together, wire together.
- Think of your best friend and your best friend’s house. The sight of your pal triggers a particular constellation of neurons, and the house triggers another. Because the two groups of neurons are active at the same time when you go over there, the two concepts become associated; hence this is called associative learning. When either of these notions become triggered, it sparks the other to life. And even better, either one can activate all sorts of other associations, such as memories of your shared conversations, meals, and laughter.
- While artificial neural networks suffer from the memory mud problem, real brains don’t. Reading a new book does not overwrite your spouse’s name in your memory,
- The fact that brains circumvent this dilemma, somehow locking down older memories, tells us that simply strengthening and weakening synapses in a network isn’t the full picture.
- The first solution to the stability/plasticity dilemma is to make sure the whole system isn’t changing at once. Instead, flexibility should turn on and off only in small spots, as steered by relevance
- the brain implements a second solution. It doesn’t always hold memories in one place. Instead, it passes what it has learned to another area for more permanent storage.
- One proposal is that stable storage cannot be achieved the first time a pattern of activity goes through the cortex; instead, an area such as the hippocampus must reactivate the trace several times to lock the memory into the cortex. This framework suggests why the hippocampus is necessary to consolidate memory: it needs to replay the patterns to the cortex over and over.
- The principle of pace layering is useful for thinking about the brain. Instead of ranging from fashion to governance to nature, the brain’s pace layers range from fast biochemical cascades to changes in gene expression.
- In this way, plastic changes are distributed along a time spectrum, not simply stored as all-or-none changes. All the forms of plasticity interact with one another, and the power of the system emerges from the layers operating in concert.
- It is not that short-term learnings overwrite one another (I’ve learned how to ride the reversed bicycle, and now the program for a normal bicycle is gone). Instead, the two programs live in deep layers. After his training, Destin has burned both programs into long-term circuitry, and the context (which bike am I on?) steers the correct path through the network.
- Recall that in the pace layers model, slow layers provide a framework for the fast layers. As a result, early experience becomes foundational. It develops into the architecture upon which everything subsequent is built. Everything new is understood through the filter of the old.
- memory is a function of everything that has come before it.
- memory is a function of everything that has come before it.
- unlike a computer, the “instructions” for flying the machine aren’t a file; they are instead tied to everything that has come before in your life. Earlier experiences build an internal city of memory, into which each new resident must find his unique fit.
- You can lose the ability to remember the narrative of your life, but this has no bearing on your ability to learn and remember new motor skills.
- The list of brain structures and their relationship to learning and memory is large and increasing, and Jody and Henry teach us that the integrity of a particular subsystem is not necessarily essential to the function of others. You can lose the ability to remember the narrative of your life, but this has no bearing on your ability to learn and remember new motor skills.
- Sometimes you want to generalize (lemons are yellow), and other times you need to remember something specific (the lemon in the veggie drawer of my fridge is rotten). This apparent incompatibility of goals yielded an important clue.33 To do both jobs well, the brain has to have different systems with different speeds of learning: one for the extraction of generalities in the environment (slow learning), and one for episodic memory (fast learning).
- The synaptic model would be convenient for neuroscientists and AI engineers, but it’s almost certainly not nature’s approach. Instead, the changes underlying memory are distributed widely over titanic numbers of neurons, synapses, molecules, and genes.
- Livewiring is the mechanism through which evolution by natural selection is relieved of some impossible pressures: instead of presaging every eventuality, brains can adjust billions of parameters on the fly to meet the unforeseen.
- Consider the precipitous drop in American crime in the mid-1990s. One hypothesis is that the drop stemmed from a single piece of legislation, the Clean Air Act, which required automobiles to switch from leaded gasoline to unleaded. With less lead in the air, crime saw a significant drop twenty-three years later. It turns out high lead levels in the air impair infant brain development, leading to more impulsive behavior and less long-term thinking. Is the correlation between lead levels and crime a coincidence? Likely not. Different countries switched over to unleaded gasoline at different times, and all of them saw the crime rate drop about twenty-three years after making the switch—just when the children raised with less lead were becoming adults.2 If the hypothesis is correct, it means the Clean Air Act might have done more to fight crime than any other policy in American history.
- We become, in essence, a recording device for our moment in the world.
- Because of livewiring, we are each a vessel of space and time. We drop into a particular spot on the world and vacuum in the details of that spot. We become, in essence, a recording device for our moment in the world.
- Although we value statements such as “he’s his own man” or “she’s an independent thinker,” there is in fact no way to separate yourself from the rich context in which you’re embedded. There is no you without the external. Your beliefs and dogmas and aspirations are shaped by it, inside and out, like a sculpture from a block of marble. Thanks to livewiring, each of us is the world.
