# Range How Generalists Triumph in a Specialized World
- (Added on l jueves, 1 de abril de 2021 23:33:56) Whether or not experience inevitably led to expertise, they agreed, depended entirely on the domain in question. Narrow experience made for better chess and poker players and firefighters, but not for better predictors of financial or political trends, or of how employees or patients would perform.
- (Added on l jueves, 1 de abril de 2021 23:34:24) “kind” learning environments. Patterns repeat over and over, and feedback is extremely accurate and usually very rapid.
- (Added on l jueves, 1 de abril de 2021 23:34:56) Drive a golf ball, and it either goes too far or not far enough; it slices, hooks, or flies straight. The player observes what happened, attempts to correct the error, tries again, and repeats for years. That is the very definition of deliberate practice, the type identified with both the ten-thousand-hours rule and the rush to early specialization in technical training.
- (Added on l jueves, 1 de abril de 2021 23:35:22) In wicked domains, the rules of the game are often unclear or incomplete, there may or may not be repetitive patterns and they may not be obvious, and feedback is often delayed, inaccurate, or both.
- (Added on l jueves, 1 de abril de 2021 23:54:04) The subtitle of Schwartz’s paper: “How Not to Teach People to Discover Rules”—that is, by providing rewards for repetitive short-term success with a narrow range of solutions.
- (Added on l viernes, 2 de abril de 2021 20:43:11) Flynn was bemused to find that the correlation between the test of broad conceptual thinking and GPA was about zero. In Flynn’s words, “the traits that earn good grades at [the university] do not include critical ability of any broad significance.”*
- (Added on l domingo, 4 de abril de 2021 20:12:49) When Sloboda and a colleague conducted a study with students at a British boarding school that recruited from around the country—admission rested entirely on an audition—they were surprised to find that the students classified as exceptional by the school came from less musically active families compared to less accomplished students, did not start playing at a younger age, were less likely to have had an instrument in the home at a very young age, had taken fewer lessons prior to entering the school, and had simply practiced less overall before arriving—a lot less. “It seems very clear,” the psychologists wrote, “that sheer amount of lesson or practice time is not a good indicator of exceptionality.” As to structured lessons, every single one of the students who had received a large amount of structured lesson time early in development fell into the “average” skill category, and not one was in the exceptional group. “The strong implication,” the researchers wrote, is “that that too many lessons at a young age may not be helpful.”
- (Added on l domingo, 4 de abril de 2021 20:13:08) However,” they added, “the distribution of effort across different instruments seems important. Those children identified as exceptional by [the school] turn out to be those children who distributed their effort more evenly across three instruments.”
- (Added on l domingo, 4 de abril de 2021 20:13:45) The psychologists highlighted the variety of paths to excellence, but the most common was a sampling period, often lightly structured with some lessons and a breadth of instruments and activities, followed only later by a narrowing of focus, increased structure, and an explosion of practice volume.
- (Added on l domingo, 4 de abril de 2021 21:05:56) In totality, the picture is in line with a classic research finding that is not specific to music: breadth of training predicts breadth of transfer. That is, the more contexts in which something is learned, the more the learner creates abstract models, and the less they rely on any particular example. Learners become better at applying their knowledge to a situation they’ve never seen before, which is the essence of creativity.
- (Added on l miércoles, 7 de abril de 2021 17:06:15) The more confident a learner is of their wrong answer, the better the information sticks when
- (Added on l miércoles, 7 de abril de 2021 17:06:25) Being forced to generate answers improves subsequent learning even if the generated answer is wrong. It can even help to be wildly wrong. Metcalfe and colleagues have repeatedly demonstrated a “hypercorrection effect.” The more confident a learner is of their wrong answer, the better the information sticks when they subsequently learn the right answer.
- (Added on l miércoles, 7 de abril de 2021 17:10:17) Struggling to retrieve information primes the brain for subsequent learning, even when the retrieval itself is unsuccessful.
- (Added on l miércoles, 7 de abril de 2021 21:50:48) “Professors who excel at promoting contemporaneous student achievement,” the economists wrote, “on average, harm the subsequent performance of their students in more advanced classes.”
- (Added on l miércoles, 7 de abril de 2021 21:50:59) The economists suggested that the professors who caused short-term struggle but long-term gains were facilitating “deep learning” by making connections.
- (Added on l miércoles, 7 de abril de 2021 21:51:06) The economists suggested that the professors who caused short-term struggle but long-term gains were facilitating “deep learning” by making connections. They “broaden the curriculum and produce students with a deeper understanding of the material.” It also made their courses more
- (Added on l miércoles, 7 de abril de 2021 21:51:09) The economists suggested that the professors who caused short-term struggle but long-term gains were facilitating “deep learning” by making connections. They “broaden the curriculum and produce students with a deeper understanding of the material.”
- (Added on l viernes, 9 de abril de 2021 0:28:18) The outside view is deeply counterintuitive because it requires a decision maker to ignore unique surface features of the current project, on which they are the expert, and instead look outside for structurally similar analogies. It requires a mindset switch from narrow to broad.
- (Added on l viernes, 9 de abril de 2021 0:33:58) the more internal details you learn about any particular scenario—physical qualities of the specific horse, the background and strategy of the particular politician—the more likely you are to say that the scenario you are investigating will occur.
- (Added on l viernes, 9 de abril de 2021 0:45:21) successful problem solvers are more able to determine the deep structure of a problem before they proceed to match a strategy to it. Less successful problem solvers are more like most students in the Ambiguous Sorting Task: they mentally classify problems only by superficial, overtly stated features, like the domain context. For the best performers, they wrote, problem solving “begins with the typing of the problem.” As education pioneer John Dewey put it in Logic, The Theory of Inquiry, “a problem well put is half-solved.”
- (Added on l viernes, 9 de abril de 2021 0:53:12) “When all the members of the laboratory have the same knowledge at their disposal, then when a problem arises, a group of similar minded individuals will not provide more information to make analogies than a single individual,” Dunbar concluded. “It’s sort of like the stock market,” he told me. “You need a mixture of strategies.” The
- (Added on l viernes, 9 de abril de 2021 0:53:32) “When all the members of the laboratory have the same knowledge at their disposal, then when a problem arises, a group of similar minded individuals will not provide more information to make analogies than a single individual,” Dunbar concluded.
- (Added on l martes, 20 de abril de 2021 23:04:59) The expression “young and foolish,” he wrote, describes the tendency of young adults to gravitate to risky jobs, but it is not foolish at all. It is ideal. They have less experience than older workers, and so the first avenues they should try are those with high risk and reward, and that have high informational value.
- (Added on l domingo, 25 de abril de 2021 23:54:37) In Gilbert’s terms, we are works in progress claiming to be finished.
- (Added on l domingo, 25 de abril de 2021 23:54:48) Psychologist Dan Gilbert called it the “end of history illusion.” From teenagers to senior citizens, we recognize that our desires and motivations sure changed a lot in the past (see: your old hairstyle), but believe they will not change much in the future.
- (Added on l domingo, 25 de abril de 2021 23:54:57) Psychologist Dan Gilbert called it the “end of history illusion.” From teenagers to senior citizens, we recognize that our desires and motivations sure changed a lot in the past (see: your old hairstyle), but believe they will not change much in the future. In Gilbert’s terms, we are works in progress claiming to be finished.
- (Added on l lunes, 26 de abril de 2021 0:10:47) “I know who I am when I see what I do.”
- (Added on l domingo, 2 de mayo de 2021 22:48:12) Bingham calls it “outside-in” thinking: finding solutions in experiences far outside of focused training for the problem itself.
- (Added on l domingo, 2 de mayo de 2021 22:56:45) Pegau was basically describing the Einstellung effect, a psychology term for the tendency of problem solvers to employ only familiar methods even if better ones are available.
- (Added on l domingo, 2 de mayo de 2021 22:58:42) Karim Lakhani, codirector of the Laboratory for Innovation Science at Harvard, had InnoCentive solvers rate problems on how relevant they were to their own field of specialization, and found that “the further the problem was from the solver’s expertise, the more likely they were to solve it.”
- (Added on l domingo, 2 de mayo de 2021 22:59:20) for difficult challenges organizations tend toward local search. They rely on specialists in a single knowledge domain, and methods that have worked before.
- (Added on l domingo, 2 de mayo de 2021 22:59:37) “Big innovation most often happens when an outsider who may be far away from the surface of the problem reframes the problem in a way that unlocks the solution.”
- (Added on l lunes, 3 de mayo de 2021 9:29:41) There is, to be sure, no comprehensive theory of creativity. But there is a well-documented tendency people have to consider only familiar uses for objects, an instinct known as functional fixedness
- (Added on l lunes, 3 de mayo de 2021 9:42:21) The specialists were adept at working for a long time on difficult technical problems, and for anticipating development obstacles. The generalists tended to get bored working in one area for too long. They added value by integrating domains, taking technology from one area and applying it in others. Neither an inventor’s breadth nor their depth alone predicted the likelihood that one of their inventions would win the Carlton Award—the “Nobel Prize of 3M.”
- (Added on l lunes, 3 de mayo de 2021 9:43:41) Ouderkirk’s group unearthed one more type of inventor. They called them “polymaths,” broad with at least one area of depth.
- (Added on l lunes, 3 de mayo de 2021 9:45:36) He is suggesting that communication technology has limited the number of hyperspecialists required to work on a particular narrow problem, because their breakthroughs can be communicated quickly and widely to others—the Yokois of the world—who work on clever applications.
- (Added on l lunes, 3 de mayo de 2021 9:49:17) “T-people like myself can happily go to the I-people with questions to create the trunk for the T,” she told me. “My inclination is to attack a problem by building a narrative. I figure out the fundamental questions to ask, and if you ask those questions of the people who actually do know their stuff, you are still exactly where you would be if you had all this other knowledge inherently. It’s mosaic building. I just keep putting those tiles together. Imagine me in a network where I didn’t have the ability to access all these people. That really wouldn’t work well.”
- (Added on l lunes, 3 de mayo de 2021 13:26:17) There is a particular kind of thinker, one who becomes more entrenched in their single big idea about how the world works even in the face of contrary facts, whose predictions become worse, not better, as they amass information for their mental representation of the world. They are on television and in the news every day, making worse and worse predictions while claiming victory, and they have been rigorously studied.
- (Added on l lunes, 3 de mayo de 2021 13:45:48) Yale law and psychology professor Dan Kahan has shown that more scientifically literate adults are actually more likely to become dogmatic about politically polarizing topics in science. Kahan thinks it could be because they are better at finding evidence to confirm their feelings: the more time they spend on the topic, the more hedgehog-like they become.
- (Added on l jueves, 6 de mayo de 2021 19:40:14) researchers who studied cultural congruence at 334 institutions of higher education found that it had no influence on any measure of organizational success whatsoever. Administrators, department heads, and trustees in strongly congruent institutions did have an easier time classifying the culture when asked, but there was no impact at all on performance, from the academic and career development of students to the satisfaction of faculty and the financial health of the college.
- (Added on l jueves, 6 de mayo de 2021 19:42:53) The experiments showed that an effective problem-solving culture was one that balanced standard practice—whatever it happened to be—with forces that pushed in the opposite direction.
- (Added on l jueves, 6 de mayo de 2021 19:43:10) The trick was expanding the organization’s range by identifying the dominant culture and then diversifying it by pushing in the opposite direction.
- (Added on l jueves, 6 de mayo de 2021 19:54:43) He emphasized that there is a difference between the chain of command and the chain of communication, and that the difference represents a healthy cross-pressure. “I warned them, I’m going to communicate with all levels of the organization down to the shop floor, and you can’t feel suspicious or paranoid about that,” he said. “I told them I will not intercept your decisions that belong in your chain of command, but I will give and receive information anywhere in the organization, at any time. I just can’t get enough understanding of the organization from listening to the voices at the top.”
- (Added on l jueves, 6 de mayo de 2021 20:01:00) One of the most common orthopedic surgeries in the world involves shaving a torn meniscus—a piece of cartilage in the knee—back to its original crescent shape. A patient reports knee pain; an MRI shows a torn meniscus; naturally, a surgeon wants to fix it. When five orthopedic clinics in Finland compared the surgery with “sham surgery”—that is, surgeons took patients with knee pain and a torn meniscus to operating rooms, made incisions, faked surgeries, and sewed them back up and sent them to physical therapy—they found that sham surgery worked just as well. Most people with a torn meniscus, it turns out, don’t have any symptoms at all and will never even know. And for those who do have a torn meniscus and knee pain, the tear may have nothing to do with the pain.
