# The Ancient Near East A Very Short Introduction
- (Added on l miércoles, 22 de abril de 2020 0:27:43) The Sea Peoples, a collection of refugees and fighters from the Aegean and other regions in the west, burned and looted cities along the eastern shores of the Mediterranean on their way to Egypt. One of their campaigns in northwestern Anatolia during this violent time might well have given rise to the legend of the Trojan War. The Egyptian king was able to repulse them, and many of them settled in the southern Levant. One of contingents of Sea Peoples, the Peleset, gave their name to the region where they settled: Palestine.
- (Added on l viernes, 24 de abril de 2020 1:10:02) One achievement did not make it into a year-name, but it is the one for which Hammurabi is best known. Toward the end of his reign he had a large stone stela set up in Sippar, with a sculpted image of himself praying to the god Shamash at the top, and inscribed all over its surface with more than 275 laws.
- (Added on l viernes, 24 de abril de 2020 1:11:55) Assurnasirpal. When the palace was complete, the king threw what might have been the biggest party that had ever been held. He claimed to have hosted 69,574 people from across his empire (and beyond) at a feast that lasted ten days. To feed them, he provided 27,000 cooked cattle, sheep, and lambs (to say nothing of the innumerable geese, ducks, gazelle, doves, and fish, along with vegetables and beer for all).
- (Added on l viernes, 24 de abril de 2020 1:12:05) Assurnasirpal and his successors built an empire at least four times larger than any that had come before.
- (Added on l viernes, 24 de abril de 2020 1:13:36) the Neo-Assyrian Empire has become almost synonymous with violence; its other achievements pale next to the memory of its military machine.
- (Added on l viernes, 24 de abril de 2020 1:30:14) reading through the Nineveh tablets, when he recognized a story that was eerily similar to the biblical flood story. Here, in cuneiform, was the tale of a man who had been instructed by a god to build a boat in advance of a great flood and to fill it with animals. His boat floated as the storm raged and the world filled with water, and it survived the storm, eventually landing on a mountaintop. The man gave thanks to the gods for his survival.
- (Added on l viernes, 24 de abril de 2020 1:30:48) The Mesopotamians and the Israelites had passed down what was essentially the same story over many generations.
- (Added on l viernes, 24 de abril de 2020 1:32:10) Gilgamesh, too, had been the subject of stories that had been told and written down for centuries. He probably was a historical king of the city of Uruk in the Early Dynastic period (though no direct evidence of him survives from that time), but by the Old Babylonian period he had become a superhero.
